- struct usage
- intialize a struct
- Casey style C
- VisualStudio tricks

# struct

I count six ways to define variables using `struct`. They all do
the same thing as far as the hardware is concerned.

I list all six ways in the next sections. First, here is the
"standard" `struct` usage I see in the wild:

```c
// Combine the typedef and struct def in one code block:
typedef struct
{
    int x;
    int y;
} int_vec2;
```

Now `int_vec2` is a type I can use to declare a variable:

```c
int_vec2 pos;
```

I access the members of the `int_vec2` variable like this:

```c
pos.x = 1;
pos.y = 2;
```

If instead I use a pointer to `int_vec2`:

```c
int_vec2 *pos;
```

Then I access the members like this:

```c
pos->x = 1;
pos->y = 2;
```

## Motivation to use a pointer to a struct

The decision to use a pointer is based on whether I pass the
`struct` to a function and the size of the `struct`.

Check the **size** of all the `struct` members with
`sizeof(int_vec2)` or with `sizeof(*pos)`. Casey shows [a trick
to do this easily in VisualStudio](day002.md#visualstudio-tricks)
(click link to go to that section in my notes).

The decision is intuition, not a rule to follow. The only way to
make a decision based on "fact" would be to look at the assembly
generated for a specific hardware target. [I describe the
intuition
here](day002.md#develop-intuition-about-what-the-compiler-does)
(click link to go to that section in my notes).

## Other ways to define variables using `struct`

I count six ways. They are all equivalent when turned into
instructions for the machine. This is purely a matter of humans
reading and understanding.

## struct way 1 - without typedef

I define a struct type, then I define a variable of that type.

```c
struct foo
{
    int x;
};
struct foo Foo; // <-- Now I have a Foo that is a foo struct.
```

## struct way 2 - shorthand for way without typedef

If I only need to make one variable of this type, the previous
way shortens to this:

```c
struct goo
{
    int x;
} Goo; // <-- Now I have a Goo that is a goo struct.
```

## struct way 3 - with typedef

```c
struct poo
{
    int x;
}; // <-- I have nothing yet, just a struct data type.
//   The thing      The new type name
//      ┌────┴───┐ ┌┴┐
typedef struct poo poo; // <-- now `poo` is really `struct poo`
poo Poo; // <-- Now I have a Poo that is a poo struct.
```

## struct way 4 - shorthand with typedef

```c
typedef struct zoo
{
    int x;
} zoo; // Now `zoo` is the data type `struct zoo`.

zoo Zoo;
```

## struct way 5 - the standard way

Just drop the "name" from the `typedef struct` line.

```c
typedef struct
{
    int x;
} zoo; // Now `zoo` is the data type `struct zoo`.

zoo Zoo;
```

# initialize a struct

Use curly braces and put a value for each member.

```c
    iv2 pos = {4, 8};
```

There is a shortcut to zero initialize a struct.

This initializes all struct values to 0 and works for both C and
C++:

```c
    iv3 = {0};
    WNDCLASS WindowClass = {0};
```

This also initializes all struct values to 0 but only works for
C++:

```c
    iv3 = {};
    WNDCLASS WindowClass = {};
```


# Casey style

## Function

```c
Return_value_type
Name(arg1,
     arg2,
     arg3)
{
}
```

## switch-case

Standard way is this:

```c
switch(Message)
{
    case ALICE:
        // some code
        break;

    case BOB:
        // some code
        break;

    default:
        break;
}
```

Casey puts each case in a code block. In C/C++ you can put code
blocks wherever you wish. Variables declared in the code block
are scoped to that block.

```c
switch(Message)
{
    case ALICE:
    {
    } break;

    case BOB:
    {
    } break;

    default:
    {
    } break;
}
```

## Develop intuition about what the compiler does

C implements function calls by creating a stack frame. This is a
block of memory pushed onto the call stack. C copies each
argument into this block of memory. C does all this under the
hood and takes care of sizing the block of memory big enough to
store a copy of each function
argument.

So if the function takes a big `struct`, then there are two
performance hits. First, calling the function consumes a large
block of memory on the call stack. Second, all of the data needs
to be copied into that large block of memory. So the C compiler
implements the function by writing lots of data-shuffling
instructions to copy all the data into this block of memory.

The alternative is to pass a pointer to the `struct`. Leave the
data where it is, don't copy any values that are not being read
in the function body.

Whatever data the function needs to access, use the `pos->x`
notation. For the function to read the value `pos->x`, it still
compiles into an instruction to "load" data. But only the values
that are being read are copied. The call stack memory usage is
less and the function is implemented with less instructions.

So what is a **big** `struct`? I guess the rule of thumb is it's
the size of the `struct` compared with the size of a pointer. If
the `struct` is bigger than its pointer, there is a performance
gain if I pass the `struct` to a function using a pointer instead
of passing the `struct` itself because C only has to copy the
pointer into the stack frame.

But don't take that as a dogmatic rule. It's better to understand
how the C compiler implements the C code as assembly instructions
to have the intuition for when code is expensive (in terms of
memory usage and/or number of "load" and "store" instructions to
shuffle data).


# VisualStudio tricks

Inspect the size of stuff using the `Watch` window. The stuff has
to be in the code. For example, to inspect the size of the
`LRESULT` datatype, it has to show up in the code somewhere. Then
in VisualStudio while the debugger is running, click on the
`Watch` window and enter `sizeof(LRESULT)` (or whatever you want
to inspect). You'll get the size and you'll also find out the
ultimate data type, for example `unsigned__int64`.
