- Setup MSVC tools and launching VisualStudio from the command line
    - [Install VisualStudio](day001.md#install)
    - [Set environment variables](day001.md#set-environment-variables)
        - [Stick this Alias in your PowerShell Profile](day001.md#stick-this-alias-in-your-powershell-profile)
- [Use MSVC tool cl.exe and use the VisualStudio
  debugger](day001.md#use)
    - [VisualStudio debugger keyboard shortcuts](day001.md#debugging-in-visualstudio)
- [I build it my way](day001.md#i-build-it-my-way)

# Setup

## Install

Install VisualStudio for the debugger.

- [Go here to download (click to open Microsoft web
  page)](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/downloads/).
- Click on `Free download` under *Community* to download the
  installer.

This is *VisualStudio 2019 Community*.

- Run the installer.
- Figure out the minimal installation to get the MSVC tools.

## What I get by installing VisualStudio

These are the three MSVC tools I've explicitly invoked while
following along with Handmade Hero:

- `cl` - compiler for C/C++
- `ml64` - compiler for Microsoft-flavored assembly
- `link` - the MSVC linker
    - not to be confused with the *GNU* `coreutils` tool named `link` [(click to open GNU documentation for link)](https://www.gnu.org/software/coreutils/manual/html_node/link-invocation.html#link-invocation)
    - the `coreutils` tool `link` is for creating symbolic links
      (nothing to do with linking object files!)

## Set environment variables

We run `vcvarsall.bat` to get the MSVC tools onto the Windows
`$env:PATH`. This section explains how to write a PowerShell
Alias that does this.

*As an aside to future me:* normally I edit my PATH by adding
lines like these in my PowerShell Profile:

```
# Put atprogram.exe on PATH
$atbackend_path = "C:\Program Files (x86)\Atmel\Studio\7.0\atbackend"
$env:PATH += "$atbackend_path;"

# Put NASM on PATH
$env:PATH += "C:\Users\mike\AppData\Local\bin\NASM;"
```

I'm guessing I can't simply add the path to `cl.exe` this way
because that tool calls other tools under the hood. This
`vcvarsall.bat` script is probably the easiest way to get the
MSVC toolchain onto the Windows PATH. That's why Casey does it
this way.

### Case edits his cmd.exe shortcut to run vcvarsall.bat

Casey edits his `cmd.exe` shortcut:

```
         stuff Casey adds─┐
                          │
existing stuff ┐          │ 
               │          │
     ┌─────────┴───┐  ┌───┴───────────────────────┐
     path to cmd.exe  \k w:\handmade\misc\shell.bat
```

The `\k` runs `shell.bat`, a short script Casey writes. Here is
the relevant section of his `shell.bat`:

```
@echo off
call "C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio\2019\Community\VC\Auxiliary\Build\vcvarsall.bat" x64
```

So when he launches the Windows command prompt he gets the MSVC
tools on his PATH.

I implement the same idea using PowerShell instead of `cmd.exe`.

### I run vcvarsall.bat and open a new PowerShell

#### Stick this Alias in your PowerShell Profile

```
function LoadVisualStudioEnvVars {
    cmd.exe /K "`"C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft Visual Studio\2019\Community\VC\Auxiliary\Build\vcvars64.bat`" & powershell.exe"
}
Set-Alias -Name vcvars -Value LoadVisualStudioEnvVars
```

#### Explain how that Alias works

Here's the same command, but I shortened the path to the `.bat`
file so it looks less daunting:

```
cmd.exe /K "`".\vcvars64.bat`" & powershell.exe"
```

The main idea is launching cmd and running the .bat file:

```
cmd.exe /K ".\vcvars64.bat"
```

- `/K` lets me pass an argument to `cmd.exe`
- `vcvars64.bat` sets environment variables for 64-bit Windows
    - this is what lets me use `cl.exe` and `devenv.exe`


The `& powershell.exe` opens a new PowerShell from the `cmd.exe`.
This second PowerShell has the new environment variables.

In order to pass both the `vcvars64.bat` path *and* the `&
powershell.exe` to the `cmd.exe \K`, everything gets put in
double quotes. But I already have double quotes around the
`vcvars64.bat` path and I *need* those double quotes because the
path contains spaces. So I have to use the back-tick character to
"escape" the inner double-quotes (the ones around the
`vcvars64.bat` path):

```
                       ┌─ pass all this junk to cmd.exe /K
           ┌───────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────┐
           │                     ┌─ path with spaces in it         │
           │ ┌───────────────────┴───────────────┐                 │
cmd.exe /K "`"C:\Program Files\blah\vcvars64.bat`" & powershell.exe"
```

### Explain again why I need a second PowerShell

PowerShell cannot run the `.bat` file on its own because the
environment variables are lost after the `.bat` file is done
running!

Here is how Casey describes the problem:

> vcvarsall just sets local environment variables to the shell
> and so it has to be local to that shell

Running `vcvarsall.bat` opens a shell, loads the environment
variables, and then closes the shell! So I'm back to where I
started without any MSVC tools on my PATH.

What I need to do is launch another PowerShell from the
`cmd.exe` that runs `vcvarsall.bat` so that I have an environment
with the MSVC tools on my PATH. I end up with this shell stack:

```
PowerShell 1<--- My original PowerShell.
                    I invoke `vcvars` here.
                    `vcvars` is my PowerShell Alias that runs cmd.exe /K blah.
cmd.exe <------- This sets environment variables and opens PowerShell 2.
PowerShell 2<--- I do all my work here.

... Here I am working, working, working, la la la ...

Now I'm done. I exit twice to "get back to normal":

PowerShell 2    PS> exit <-- This bumps me back into `cmd.exe`
cmd.exe         PS> exit <-- This bumps me back to PowerShell 1.
PowerShell 1    PS>      <-- I'm back to my original PowerShell
```

# Use

- `vcvars` loads MSVC tools and VisualStudio onto the PATH
- `devenv` launches VisualStudio
- `cl` is the compiler

This section shows these aliases in actual use. I talk about
building with `cl` last because I do this differently from Casey,
so I've got a bunch more detail to add.

## Load environment variables first

I'm going to use those aliases from a terminal in my editor, so I
need them defined before I enter the environment where I invoke
my editor.

- Open PowerShell.
- Load the `vcvars` environment variables:

```
PS C:\cygwin64\home\mike\gitrepos\handmade> vcvars
**********************************************************************
** Visual Studio 2019 Developer Command Prompt v16.8.5
** Copyright (c) 2020 Microsoft Corporation
**********************************************************************
[vcvarsall.bat] Environment initialized for: 'x64'
Windows PowerShell
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Try the new cross-platform PowerShell https://aka.ms/pscore6
```

Now I run alias `bash` for Cygwin bash or `mingw` for MinGW bash.
And from there I start `Vim`.


## Load VisualStudio to start debugging

Say I've already built my `.exe`. Start debugging directly from
PowerShell:

```
PS C:\cygwin64\home\mike\gitrepos\handmade> devenv .\build\win32_handmade.exe
```

I'm usually doing this from within Vim. In Vim, I open a bash
terminal and launch VisualStudio:

```
mike@DESKTOP-H26981V ~/gitrepos/handmade/code
$ devenv ../build/win32_handmade.exe 
```

Or add a trailing `&` to be able to continue using that bash
terminal:

```
mike@DESKTOP-H26981V ~/gitrepos/handmade/code
$ devenv ../build/win32_handmade.exe &
[1] 135
```

## Debugging in VisualStudio

- `F5` starts debug, focus switches to launched application
- switch back to VisualStudio, `Shift+F5` stops debug
- `F11` steps through the code
- `Shift+F11` steps out (go up the call stack)

## Solution is saved for me

When I close VisualStudio after launching it this way, it will
ask to save the solution it made for running out.exe. Do save
this. Put it in the build folder.

Always do this the first time running a new executable. After
that, I can just launch VisualStudio and let it use the
"solution" it created. Read "solution" as "session."

So now that there is an existing "solution", I can just do
`devenv` to launch VisualStudio and pick up where I left off.

In VisualStudio, set this up like this:

- *Tools* -> *Options* -> *Startup* -> *Most Recent Solution*

So once there is an existing solution:

- `PS> devenv` (will open most recent solution)

If that is `build/win32_handmade.sln`, then `devenv` is
equivalent to:

- `PS> devenv .\build\win32_handmade.sln` <--- most recent

Specify a different session to open:

- `PS> devenv .\build\ex_ptr_alias.sln`

And again, if there is no session, run the `.exe`:

- `PS> devenv .\build\win32_handmade.exe` <--- first time use

Then close VisualStudio to get a prompt to save the `.sln`.

Launching VisualStudio sessions is important because VisualStudio
is going to crash often.

And I like that I can close VisualStudio each time I'm done using
it. I'm just using it as a debugger, not as an IDE.

I don't know how to start a VisualStudio project from scratch and
so far there is no reason to learn how to do that.

# I build it my way

This is where I diverge a little from Casey's way. I'm still
doing a unity build, but I'm using `make`.

Why use `make`? It integrates with Vim's quickfix window, making
it easy to hop to lines of code that generate compiler
warnings/errors.

In other words, I use `make` because my editor already "talks" to
`make` without any customization on my part. It's also the tool
I'm familiar with. I have zero motivation to learn `.bat`
scripting.


Here is the essential `Makefile`:

```make
CFLAGS = /Zi
IMPORTLIBS =
.PHONY: ..\build\win32_handmade.exe
..\build\win32_handmade.exe: win32_handmade.cpp
	cl.exe $(CFLAGS) $(IMPORTLIBS) $< /Fe"$@"
```

With this saved in a file named `Makefile`, I just run `make` to
build the `.exe`.

- `.PHONY` makes the recipe always run, regardless of whether
  the `.exe` is "up to date" (this avoids having to call `make`
  with the `-B` flag)
- `CFLAGS` and `IMPORTLIBS` are just placeholders at this point:
    - `CFLAGS` are the `cl.exe` compiler flags
        - `/Zi` outputs the files VisualStudio needs to run the
          debugger
    - `IMPORTLIBS` is where all the `.lib` dependencies are
      listed
        - on day 1 there are no dependencies
        - pretty soon it will look like this: `IMPORTLIBS = user32.lib gdi32.lib`
    - the names of the lib dependencies come from the online
      Win32 API documentation
        - the moment Casey tells me the name of the Win32 API
          function call, I search for it on the online docs and I
          get this info

I also find it useful to generate a tags file for libraries so I
can hop to definitions and auto-complete functions and macros.

The library tags recipe is a kludgey mess, but each step is
simple enough:

- run `cl.exe` on the `.cpp` to generate a list of source
  dependencies in JSON format
    - JSON would not be my first choice, but that's the only
      option `cl.exe` gives
- Python translates the JSON plain text file to another plain
  text file that `ctags` understands
- `ctags` uses that plain text file to create a file named `lib-tags`
    - my `.vimrc` sets Vim to look for a file named `lib-tags`
      when it is searching for tags

```make
.PHONY: lib-tags
lib-tags: win32_handmade.cpp
	cl.exe /c /sourceDependencies lib-tags.json $<
	rm win32_handmade.obj
	python.exe parse-lib-tags-json.py
	rm lib-tags.json
	ctags -f lib-tags --c-kinds=+p -L lib-tags.txt
	rm lib-tags.txt
```

This is the Python script that translates JSON to something
`ctags` understands:

```python
import json
with open("lib-tags.json") as fin:
    parsed = json.load(fin)
    with open("lib-tags.txt", mode="w") as fout:
        for include in parsed["Data"]["Includes"]:
            fout.write(include)
            fout.write("\n")
```
